---
layout: post
title: chapter 8 Selection and Navigation
---

In this chapter, we'll take a closer look at timeline and edit selections and navigation of tracks and clips. We'll also discuss memory locations and their use in navigation and editing within a session.

<!--more-->

## Types of Selection
When working in Pro Tools, virtually all of the time you'll have the timeline selection and edit selection linked. This is the recommended mode of operation for all users but it's especially important for blind users. Sighted users can readily see when the timeline and edit selections are not linked and can quickly identify when either  or clips are independently selected. If the timeline and edit selections are unlinked, it's not easy for a blind user to tell without checking a few things and it can be disorienting when there are unexpected results while working in a session. With timeline and edit selection linked, each type of selection is essentially one and the same. That said, let's look at each separately.

### Timeline Selections
Timeline selections refer to ranges specified across the timeline ruler. A timeline selection might be as short as a millisecond or as long as the entire length of a session file (up to 24 hours). Sighted users can drag across a ruler to make a timeline selection. Blind users use the counters to achieve the same result. By entering values into the Start, End and Length fields, a range can be defined, creating a selection across the timeline.

###  Edit Selections
Edit selections are usually made by using one of the edit tools and clicking on or dragging across a clip in the timeline. This type of selection can also be done using keyboard shortcuts.

<audio controls><source src='https://raw.githubusercontent.com/PTAccess/PTAccess.github.io/master/audio/65 Timeline and Edit Selections.m4a'></audio>

###### Key Shortcuts:

* Play Edit Selection: Control+Left Bracket
* Play Timeline Selection: Control+Right Bracket

## Working with Selections

### Creating Separate Timeline Selections and Edit Selections
As discussed earlier, this tutorial assumes that your timeline selections and edit selections are linked. For illustration purposes, let's look at how unlinking the timeline and edit selections affects navigation and playback as well as editing.
### Link Timeline and edit Selection

> <audio controls><source src='https://raw.githubusercontent.com/PTAccess/PTAccess.github.io/master/audio/66 Link Timeline and Edit Selection.m4a'></audio>
> 
> * Select a clip later in the timeline
> * Unlink timeline and edit selection
> * press return and show the difference
> * Show Control or Option plus Left/Right Bracket
> * Discuss unexpected behavior

### Link Track and Edit Selection
Just as timeline selections can either be separate or linked, track and edit selections can also be tied together or not. Much in the same way as timeline and edit selections, track and edit selections can be made in different ways and, although they are easily distinguished visually, it's highly recommended for blind users that the "Link Track and edit Selection" item be checked under the Options menu.

> <audio controls><source src='https://raw.githubusercontent.com/PTAccess/PTAccess.github.io/master/audio/67 Link Track and Edit Selection.m4a'></audio>
> 
> * With the option checked, show track selection following along with edit
> * Unlink and show behavior

### Making Selections on Multiple Tracks
We've seen that selections can span across a range within the timeline. We've also seen how that range can apply to a selection within a track itself. Let's look at how the selection can also span a range of tracks.

> <audio controls><source src='https://raw.githubusercontent.com/PTAccess/PTAccess.github.io/master/audio/68 Making Selections on Multiple Tracks.m4a'></audio>
> 
> * Show how to click on adjacent tracks to extend the selection
> * Show how to use Control+Shift+P or Semicolon to extend selection
> * Show how to Shift-click to select between track ranges
> * Show how to click non-adjacent tracks to extend selection
> * Show Command-clicking or pressing select button on surface accomplishes this

### Using the Tab Key
Assuming the Tab to Transients mode is off, you can navigate and make selections within the timeline by using the Tab key to move between clip boundaries. This means of navigating requires that there be at least one clip within the selected track. Also, the number and size of the clips determines the potential navigation points. Using a combination of the Tab, Option and Shift keys, it's possible to make both timeline and edit selections.

[demonstration: 69 Using the Tab Key

###### Key Shortcuts:

* Move Edit Insertion to Next Clip Boundary: Tab
* Move Edit Insertion to Previous Clip Boundary: Option+Tab
* Select from Edit Insertion to Next Clip Boundary:Shift+Tab
* Select from Edit Insertion to Previous Clip Boundary: Shift+Option+Tab
* Move to and Select Next Clip: Control+Tab
* Move to and Select Previous Clip: control+Option+Tab
* Add Next Clip to Current Selection: Control+Shift+Tab
* Add Previous Clip to Current Selection: Control+Option+Shift+Tab

### Tabbing to Transients
When "Tab to Transients" is enabled, it's possible to use the same key commands as mentioned just above but, rather than moving the insertion point to a clip boundary, Pro Tools moves the insertion cursor between transients within a clip.

<audio controls><source src='https://raw.githubusercontent.com/PTAccess/PTAccess.github.io/master/audio/70 Tabbing to Transients.m4a'></audio>

###### Key shortcuts:

* Toggle Tab to Transients Mode: Command+Option+Tab
* Speak Status of Tab to Transients Mode (with Flo Tools): Command+Option+Tab
* Toggle Tab to Transients Mode (with Flo Tools): Double-tap Command+Option+T
* Move Edit Insertion to Next Transient: Tab Key
* Move Edit Insertion to Previous Transient: Option+Tab
* Select from Edit Insertion to Next Transient: Shift+Tab
* Select from Edit Insertion to Previous Transient: shift+Option+Tab

## Adjusting the Session View
Let's take a look at adjusting track heights and changing the order of tracks.

### Adjusting Track Height
In general, while using keyboard shortcuts to navigate and edit clips, track height (as determined in the Edit window) doesn't matter. The commands work the same whether a track's height is set to micro or jumbo. However, track height does affect how many tracks are visible to sighted users (in case that's a consideration) and it also affects how some track controls are displayed. In smaller views, some controls might be consolidated with other elements or might disappear altogether. Let's take a look at how to adjust track height.

<audio controls><source src='https://raw.githubusercontent.com/PTAccess/PTAccess.github.io/master/audio/71 Adjusting Track Height.m4a'></audio>

###### Key shortcuts:

* Adjust Height of Selected Tracks in the Edit Window: Control+Up/Down Arrow
* Set Track Height for All Tracks: Option-click Track Options button in the edit window
* Set Track Height for All Selected Tracks: Option+Shift-click Track Options button in Edit window
* With Flo Tools Inspector, double-tap the letter H on a focused track to set track height on focused track

### Changing the Track Order
The order of tracks may be changed in several ways. For sighted users, it's a simple matter of clicking and dragging a track or tracks into the desired position. For blind users, it's essentially the same process. However, in sessions with large track counts, it can get tricky since there's no easy way to scroll the track list. There are some work-arounds and best practices so let's take a look at them.

<audio controls><source src='https://raw.githubusercontent.com/PTAccess/PTAccess.github.io/master/audio/72 Changing the Track Order.m4a'></audio>

###### Key shortcuts:

* Mouse Down/Mouse Up: VO+shift+Command+Space Bar

## Adding Markers to Your Session
Markers can be used to define specific locations in the timeline for quick recall. They can be used for navigation or for helping make a selection.

### About Memory Locations
The terms "markers" and "memory locations" are often used interchangeably among many Pro Tools users. There's technically a difference and one worth mentioning. A marker is considered a  bookmark to a specific point on the timeline. A memory location can be a marker but can include other aspects like timeline selections, track visibility and Pre/Post Roll among other things. For now, we'll focus on markers and how they can be helpful in navigating and editing.

### Creating a Marker
To create a marker, press the Enter key. The resulting dialog offers a few additional options.

<audio controls><source src='https://raw.githubusercontent.com/PTAccess/PTAccess.github.io/master/audio/73 Creating a Marker.m4a'></audio>

###### Key shortcuts:

* Create New Memory Location: Enter on the numeric keypad

### The Memory Locations Window
The Memory Locations window displays a list of markers and other memory locations you've created. Choose Windows>Memory Locations or press Command+5 on the numeric keypad to open the Memory Locations window.

<audio controls><source src='https://raw.githubusercontent.com/PTAccess/PTAccess.github.io/master/audio/74 The Memory Locations Window.m4a'></audio>

###### Key shortcuts:

* Open Memory Locations Window: Command+5 on the numeric keypad 

### Recalling a Marker
Markers can be recalled from within the Memory Locations window by clicking on the number or name of the marker. A faster and more immediate way to recall a marker is by using the numeric keypad. Press decimal then the number of the marker then decimal again to recall the memory location number.

<audio controls><source src='https://raw.githubusercontent.com/PTAccess/PTAccess.github.io/master/audio/75 recalling a Marker.m4a'></audio>

###### Key Shortcuts:

* Recall Memory Location: Decimal, Number, decimal on the numeric keypad
* Create/Edit Memory Location: Decimal, Number, enter on the numeric keypad

### Deleting a Marker
A marker (or memory location) can be deleted from the Memory Locations window by selecting it and choosing ""Clear (Location Name)" from the Memory Locations menu button.

<audio controls><source src='https://raw.githubusercontent.com/PTAccess/PTAccess.github.io/master/audio/76 Deleting a Marker.m4a'></audio>

### Creating a Selection Using Markers
You can use markers to make selections in the timeline. This is handy when you want to select areas you've defined within the timeline like a verse or chorus or to recall a point to which you'd like to make a timeline selection. Use the numeric kepad to recall a marker then press and hold Shift while calling up another marker.

<audio controls><source src='https://raw.githubusercontent.com/PTAccess/PTAccess.github.io/master/audio/77 Creating a Selection Using Markers.m4a'></audio>

###### Key Shortcuts:

* Select from Edit Insertion to a Memory Location that is a Marker: Press and hold shift while recalling a memory location (Decimal, Number, decimal on the numeric keypad)
